Protein Organization 
Protein’s structure enables it to perform a variety of functions. 
Proteins are similar to carbohydrates and lipids in that they are 
polymers of simple repeating units; however, proteins are much 
more structurally complex. In contrast to carbohydrates, which 
have identical repeating units, proteins are made up of amino acids 
that are different from one another. Furthermore, a protein is 
organized into four different structural levels. 
Primary: The first level is the one-dimensional sequence of amino 
acids that are held together by peptide bonds. Carbohydrates and 
lipids also are one-dimensional sequences of their respective 
monomers, which may be branched, coiled, fibrous, or globular, but 
their conformation is much more random and is not organized by 
their sequence of monomers. 
Secondary: The second level of protein structure is dependent 
on the chemical interactions between amino acids, which cause the 
protein to fold into a specific shape, such as a helix (like a coiled 
spring) or sheet. 
Tertiary: The third level of protein structure is threedimensional. As the different side chains of amino acids chemically 
interact, they either repel or attract each other, resulting in the 
folded structure. Thus, the specific sequence of amino acids in a 
protein directs the protein to fold into a specific, organized shape. 
Quaternary: The fourth level of structure is achieved when 
protein fragments called peptides combine to make one larger 
functional protein. The protein hemoglobin is an example of a 
protein that has quaternary structure. It is composed of four 
peptides that bond together to form a functional oxygen carrier. 
A protein’s structure also influences its nutritional quality. Large 
fibrous protein structures are more difficult to digest than smaller 
proteins and some, such as keratin, are indigestible. Because 
digestion of some fibrous proteins is incomplete, not all of the 
amino acids are absorbed and available for the body to utilize, 
thereby decreasing their nutritional value. 